 There is no agreed upon definition of terrorism. It's now cliché to note that one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter, a phrase which captures the idea that political meaning, context, and perhaps even success play a role in whether the violent actions of a group or individuals are perceived as legitimate or not. However, since 9-11, the term has become even more contentious. It's not unusual to see commentators point to the inconsistency in which the term terrorism is used. When al-Qaeda or Islamic State inspired groups are involved in incidents, terrorism is often suspected, even when the motivation is unknown. But white males who commit similar acts are often deemed mentally ill or of engaging in lesser crimes. So I'm going to use the term violent extremism more frequently than terrorism this week. This is my way of avoiding the terrorism trap. There are acts of political violence which, for a variety of reasons, fall short of our legal definition of terrorism that nonetheless may meet the threshold for being a national security concern. For example, the 2014 attack by Justin Bork against RCMP officers in Moncton, New Brunswick is not typically described as terrorism, but Bork appears to have subscribed to conspiracy theories and anti-government ideology. The use of the term violent extremism captures this, where terrorism may not. Additionally, terrorism tends to refer to specific acts of violence, whereas I think it's more important to note that what is at issue here is a spectrum of activities that can go into supporting it, including facilitation, financing, and radicalization. So individuals who engage in these activities may not actually engage in acts of terrorist But they support an extremist view generally, and the idea of using violence to bring about a particular vision of how life should be. Here too the term violent extremism is more appropriate. Today the legal definition of terrorism in Canada can be found in section 8301 of the Criminal Code. It's a pretty long section, but for our purposes it includes an act or a mission in or outside Canada that is committed in whole or in part for a political, religious, or ideological purpose, objective, or cause. Canada is no stranger to violent extremism. Throughout its history, a diverse number of violent movements have operated within Canada or used our country as a base from which to export terrorism abroad. This includes the Irish Fenians, the Sons of Freedom, a splinter group of the Doukhobors a Russian religious sect that engaged in a campaign of arson and bombings in the 1920s through to the 1960s. And in the 1960s the Front de Liberation du Quebec, the FLQ, a violent extremist separatist group that was responsible for hundreds of acts of violent extremism, including a series of bombings against a range of targets, which killed at least six individuals. The most famous incident occurred in October 1970, when the group organized the kidnapping of British Trade Commissioner James Cross and Quebec Labor Minister Pierre Laporte. The latter was killed a few days into the crisis. As a result of these actions, public support for the FLQ plummeted. Although the movement continued to engage in bombing throughout Quebec, the movement was largely infiltrated by 1973 and dispersed. By the 1980s, Canada experienced what may be called transnational or spillover terrorism. Essentially, transnational terrorism is the internationalization of an essentially domestic dispute. Between the 1960s and the 1990s, Canada's experience of spillover violent extremism was mostly in the realm of facilitation and financing groups abroad. Entities, such as the Irish Republican Army, the IRA, for example, used Canada as a platform for fundraising. Nevertheless, there were serious acts of violence. For example, between the 1960s through to the 1980s, anti-Castro Cubans in the United States and Canada engaged in a series of 12 attacks, resulting in one death and several persons injured, as well as serious property damage. There were also acts of violence associated with Armenian and Tamil extremist groups, as well as Sikh extremist groups, including Air India Flight 182, which killed 331 persons on board, including 268 Canadian citizens. The 1990s saw the rise of what would become known as Al Qaeda and eventually Islamic State-inspired extremism. The case of Ahmed Rassam, the Millennium Bomber, was indicative of this. Rassam was caught entering the United States from Canada, with explosives in the trunk of his car for the purpose of attacking the Los Angeles airport in December 1999. In the post-911 era, Al Qaeda and Islamic State-inspired extremism became what is now described as a homegrown threat. The most famous of these cases is the so-called Toronto 18 case, which saw a number of individuals charged for planning attacks against the Toronto Stock Exchange and various security and defense-related targets. With the start of the Syrian Civil War, the threat from Al Qaeda and Islamic State extremists changed once again. Now it was Canadians who were seeking travel overseas to join violent extremist groups abroad. This raised concerns that individuals who traveled overseas could be radicalized further and trained in battle, making future plots against Canadians more deadly and effective. However, at the time of recording this video, it appears that the fear that dozens, if not hundreds of foreign fighters might seek to return to Canada has not materialized. Another form of extremism comes from state-backed groups such as Hisbala, which is backed by Iran, and Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, the L-E-T, a Pakistan-based violent extremist group. Within Canada, these groups tend to fundraise and recruit Canadians to engage in supporting violent extremism abroad. Finally, more recently, there has been concern over far-right extremism and single-issue extremism in Canada. A challenge in fighting these groups is that they really aren't motivated by a single ideology so much as they are a collection of grievances. For the purposes of this segment, I will use the definition provided by Professors Barbara Perry and Ryan Scrivins, who describe far-right extremism as "...a loose movement, animated by a racially, ethnically, and sexually defined nationalism. This nationalism is typically framed in terms of white power and is grounded in xenophobic and exclusionary understandings of the perceived threats posed by groups such as non-whites, Jews, immigrants, homosexuals, and feminists." In support of these beliefs, far-right extremist groups are willing to assume both an offensive and defensive stance in the interest of preserving their so-called heritage and their so-called homeland. Importantly, although it has received a lot of recent attention, far-right extremist violence in Canada is not new. In the 1960s, the Toronto-based Edmund Burke Society, an anti-left and anti-communist group that called for militant conservative activism, attacked Vietnam war protesters and gatherings of labor groups and Marxists. This group later became the more overtly racist and anti-Semitic Western Guard, but its membership declined in the 1970s. Canada also has branches of the Ku Klux Klan, or the KKK, a racist, nativist, and anti-Semitic group that came to Canada via the United States in the 1920s. There was a resurgence in the group's activities in the 1970s and 1980s, but this was forestalled by the conviction and imprisonment of much of its leadership. However, there are signs that the Klan and other people sympathetic to its aims exist in Canada today. In 2017, flyers claiming to be from the organization were distributed in British Columbia. Other far-right groups with historical presence in Canada include Skinheads, the so-called Creativity Movement, a Christian extremist group which seeks to create an ethnically-based religion to advance the white race that developed the concept of racial holy war, or what's sometimes called Rohoa. Today far-right extremism, or at least the broad array of groups that we can collect under this label, come from a variety of sources. I think it is fair to argue that these groups constitute a far-right ecosystem that overlaps and feeds off of each interaction. This includes cultural chauvinists and misogynist groups such as the Proud Boys, who are known to contribute to violence at political rallies and target indigenous groups through violent neo-Nazi gangs. It also includes anti-immigrant Islamophobic groups such as Le Mute, the Soldiers of Odin and its splinter groups such as the Wolves of Odin and Northern Guard, Canadian branches of the Patriotic Europeans against the Islamization of the West or Pegida, neo-Nazi groups such as Atomwaffen and others. On the fringes of this ecosystem are anti-government movements generally, such as violent extremists motivated by the loosely connected ideas comprising the sovereign citizens or freemen on the land movements or perhaps the involuntary celibates or the incels. The 2014 Moncton shootings that I mentioned earlier may be seen as an example of the former, and the Toronto 18 van attack is allegedly an example of the latter. Importantly, many of the individuals who subscribe to anti-government or misogynist ideologies do not subscribe to all of the views of the far-right extremist groups listed above. They may be preoccupied with their own personal grievances rather than racist ideology. Instead, what unites these individuals, and where there is overlap with some far-right extremists, is the belief that the government is illegitimate. As this brief survey of violent extremism in Canada shows, it is a diverse and constantly evolving threat that is not likely to go away anytime soon. Even within the same ideologies, we can see a rapid strategic change. The Islamic State's call for supporters to join them in Syria and Iraq dramatically and suddenly change the nature of the threat to Canada. And the far-right continues its pattern of congregating around certain ideas and then splintering into different factions. In the next segment, we will look at the spectrum of activities the violent extremist groups engage in and why they constitute a threat to the security of Canada. See you then.